
14

Automatic Zoom
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 20251Treatment-aware Diffusion Probabilistic Modelfor Longitudinal MRI Generation and DiffuseGlioma Growth PredictionQinghui Liu, Elies Fuster-Garcia, Ivar Thokle Hovden, Bradley J MacIntosh, Edvard O.S. Grødem, PetterBrandal, Carles Lopez-Mateu, Donatas Sedereviˇcius, Karoline Skogen, Till Schellhorn, Atle Bjørnerud,and Kyrre Eeg EmblemAbstract— Diffuse gliomas are malignant brain tumorsthat grow widespread through the brain. The complex inter-actions between neoplastic cells and normal tissue, as wellas the treatment-induced changes often encountered, makeglioma tumor growth modeling challenging. In this paper,we present a novel end-to-end network capable of futurepredictions of tumor masks and multi-parametric magneticresonance images (MRI) of how the tumor will look atany future time points for different treatment plans. Ourapproach is based on cutting-edge diffusion probabilisticmodels and deep-segmentation neural networks. We in-cluded sequential multi-parametric MRI and treatment infor-mation as conditioning inputs to guide the generative diffu-sion process as well as a joint segmentation process. Thisallows for tumor growth estimates and realistic MRI gen-eration at any given treatment and time point. We trainedthe model using real-world postoperative longitudinal MRIdata with glioma tumor growth trajectories represented astumor segmentation maps over time. The model demon-strates promising performance across various tasks, in-cluding generating high-quality multi-parametric MRI withtumor masks, performing time-series tumor segmentations,and providing uncertainty estimates. Combined with thetreatment-aware generated MRI, the tumor growth predic-tions with uncertainty estimates can provide useful infor-mation for clinical decision-making.Index  Terms— Diffuse glioma, Longitudinal MRI, Diffu-sion probabilistic model, Tumor growth prediction, Deeplearning.This  work  was  supported  by  the  European  Union’s  Horizon  2020Programme:  ERC  Grant  Agreement  No.  758657-ImPRESS,  HelseSør-Øst    Regional    Health    Authority    grants    2021057,    2017073,theResearchCouncilofNorwaygrants325971,261984,andgrantPID2021-127110OA-I00(PROGRESS)fundedbyMCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033   from   Agencia   de   Investigaci ́onde  Espana  and  by  ERDF  A  way  of  making  Europe.  (Correspondingauthors: Qinghui Liu and Elies Fuster-Garcia.)Q.   Liu,   I.   T.   Hovden,   B.   J.   MacIntosh,   E.   O.S.   Grødem,   D.Sedereviˇcius, P. Brandal, K. Skogen, T. Schellhorn, A. Bjørnerud andK. E. Emblem are with the Department of Physics and ComputationalRadiology,   Oslo   University   Hospital   (OUS),   Rikshospitalet,   0372Oslo,  Norway  (e-mail:qiliu@ous-hf.no;  ivarth@student.matnat.uio.no;brad.macintosh@utoronto.ca;edvardgr@uio.no;pebra@ous-hf.no;   donsed@ous-hf.no;   kaskog@ous-hf.no;   UXSCTI@ous-hf.no;atle.bjornerud@fys.uio.no, kemblem@ous-hf.no).E. Fuster-Garcia and C. Lopez-Mateu are with the Biomedical DataScience Laboratory, Instituto Universitario de Tecnolog ́ıas de la Infor-maci ́on y Comunicaciones, Universitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia, 46022Valencia, Spain (e-mail:elfusgar@upv.es, clopmat@upv.es).I.  INTRODUCTIONDIFFUSE  gliomas  are  the  most  common  central  nervoussystem tumors [1], accounting for 80% of all malignantbrain  tumors,  30%  of  all  primary  brain  tumors,  and  a  ma-jor  cause  of  death  from  primary  brain  tumors  [2].  Despiteadvances  in  diagnosis  and  therapy,  the  prognosis  of  diffuseglioma patients, particularly those with glioblastomas, remainspoor.  Glioblastoma  patients  have  a  median  survival  time  ofless  than  15  months  after  initial  diagnosis  [3],  [4].  Onlyvery  few  treatment  improvements  have  been  made  the  last20 years [5], and new approaches are highly needed to betterunderstand  and  estimate  glioma  tumor  growth  and  treatmentresponse  [6].  Improved  growth  prediction  can  provide  usefulinsights  for  diagnosis,  prognosis,  personalized  medicine,  andtherapy planning [7].One of the distinguishing features of diffuse glioma growth,particularly  glioblastoma,  is  the  highly  irregular  and  unpre-dictable growth patterns involving multiple tissue types, whichmake  the  prediction  of  diffuse  glioma  growth  notoriouslydifficult  [8].  Most  existing  approaches  for  modeling  diffuseglioma  growth  rely  on  variants  of  reaction-diffusion  equa-tions  that  characterize  tumor  invasion  (diffusion  term)  andproliferation  (reaction  term)  [9]–[11].  To  capture  mechanicaldeformation,  the  reaction-diffusion  model  can  be  coupled  toa  linear  elasticity  model  for  brain  and  tumor  mechanicalproperties  [9],  [12].  Extension  of  these  models  coupled  tononlinear  elasticity  has  also  been  presented  [13]–[15],  butthese  models  are  more  difficult  to  calibrate  either  becausethey  are  computationally  expensive  or  they  have  too  manyparameters extracted from the imaging data [16].Recently,  deep-learning-based  approaches  have  been  de-veloped  to  address  the  glioma  growth  prediction  problem[17]–[20], by learning growth patterns directly from the MRIdata.  Gaw  et  al.  [18]  (2019)  tried  to  combine  a  reaction-diffusion   model   (proliferation-invasion   mechanistic   tumorgrowth model) with a data-driven graph-based semi-supervisedlearning  model  to  provide  spatially  resolved  tumor  cell  den-sity  predictions  on  primary  glioblastoma  patients  with  pre-operative MRI. The authors of [19] (2020) explored the pos-sibility  of  using  generative  adversarial  networks  (GAN  [21])for predicting pre-operative glioma growth on both high-gradearXiv:2309.05406v5  [eess.IV]  22 Jan 2025
2IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2025and low-grade. Other researchers argue that the growth processis  not  deterministic  (e.g.,  in  [17],  [20])  and  introduced  adeep probabilistic generative model for learning glioma growthdynamics,  i.e.,  estimating  a  distribution  of  possible  futurechanges given previous observations of the same tumor. How-ever,  all  of  these  approaches  have  been  constrained  to  usingonly  image  data  to  predict  tumor  masks  while  ignoring  theeffects of any other factors, such as the administered treatmentand changes in it. These interventions clearly influence gliomagrowth  behavior  and  should  be  accounted  for.  Additionally,these  models  also  lack  the  ability  to  generate  future  MRimages  and  associated  uncertainty  maps.  Collectively,  theselimitations are barriers to clinical translation.The  key  challenge  of  our  work  stems  from  the  intrinsiccomplexity of modeling glioma growth under treatment influ-ence  [22].  Gliomas  exhibit  highly  heterogeneous,  non-linear,and patient-specific growth patterns, shaped by both intrinsicbiological  factors  and  external  treatments.  This  variability  isexacerbated  by  the  differential  impacts  of  various  treatmentregimens  on  tumor  progression  [23],  creating  a  significanthurdle  in  generalizing  the  model  across  diverse  patients  andtreatment protocols.Our  research  addresses  this  challenge  by  developing  amodel capable of accounting for these multifaceted treatmenteffects. We introduce the Treatment-aware Diffusion (TaDiff)probabilistic  model,  which  leverages  recent  advances  in  dif-fusion  probabilistic  models  (DPM)  [24]–[26]  and  representa-tion learning [27]–[29]. TaDiff integrates treatment data withsequential  MRI  scans  to  predict  tumor  growth  and  generatefuture MRIs, effectively overcoming the limitations of earlierapproaches.Specifically, the TaDiff model learns treatment-aware tumorgrowth dynamics by incorporating a sequence of source MRIsand  treatment  variables  as  conditioning  inputs.  It  employsan  optimized  joint-task  learning  strategy  that  combines  thestrengths of DDPM and tumor segmentation neural networks.This  approach  enables  the  generation  of  future  MRIs  usinga  reverse  diffusion  process  for  any  given  treatment  and  timepoint, as well as predicting tumor growth through a joint tumorsegmentation process. By performing multiple samplings withTaDiff  to  account  for  various  potential  treatment  responses(past,  present,  and  future),  the  model  can  predict  multiplepossible tumor growth scenarios and estimate the uncertaintyof  tumor  evolution.  An  overview  of  the  TaDiff  model  isillustrated in Figure 1.In summary, our contributions are:•We  propose  a  new  conditional  diffusion  probabilisticmodel, the Treatment-aware Diffusion (TaDiff) network,capable   of   performing   multiple   tasks   simultaneously:predicting future multi-parametric MRI scans, estimatingtumor  segmentation  masks  for  past  and  future  MRIs,and quantifying uncertainty in tumor evolution. Throughjoint-task learning, TaDiff captures intricate tumor growthpatterns  by  conditioning  on  both  past  images  and  treat-ment  data,  enabling  the  generation  of  clinically  relevantfuture  MRIs  and  more  accurate  predictions  of  tumorprogression.•We  also  introduce  a  novel  dilated  longitudinal  tumorfusion  weighting  mechanism  to  prioritize  focusing  oncrucial  peritumoral  tissues  in  glioma  progression.  Thisapproach  strengthens  our  model’s  ability  to  learn  spa-tiotemporal  dependencies  between  tumor  evolution  andtreatment  effects,  allowing  for  a  more  precise  represen-tation  of  glioma  dynamics.  This  leads  to  more  accuratepredictions while ensuring stable and efficient training.•Our extensive empirical studies on local and public high-grade glioma datasets confirm the efficacy of our model.It generates longitudinal glioma growth masks and high-quality synthetic multi-parametric MR images using pastimages  and  treatment  conditions.  Moreover,  our  methodoffers  uncertainty  estimates  for  each  prediction,  aidingclinical decision-making.II.  PRELIMINARYThe core ideas of diffusion models [26], [30] can be sum-marized into two key processes: a forward diffusion process,where  noise  is  added  to  the  data,  and  a  reverse  diffusionprocess where a deep neural network tries to separate the noisefrom the data.1) Forward Diffusion Process:The  forward  process  is  de-fined  as  a  Markov  Chain  in  which  Gaussian  noise  is  grad-ually  added  into  a  data  samplex0(e.g.  an  image)  overTsuccessive  steps  parameterized  by  a  schedule  of  variances{βt∈(0,1)}Tt=1to  produce  a  sequence  of  noise  samplesx1,...,xT. It is described by the formulation:q(x1:T|x0) =TYt=1q(xt|xt−1)≈N(0;I).(1)At each step of the forward process, Gaussian noise is addedaccording  toq(xt|xt−1)  =N(xt;√1−βtxt−1,βtI),  wherethe noisy level is controlled by the varianceβt(known as the’diffusion  rate’).  The  data  sample  gradually  loses  its  distin-guishable  features  as  the  steptbecomes  larger.  EventuallywhenT→ ∞,xTis  equivalent  to  an  isotropic  Gaussiandistribution.  A  key  property  of  the  forward  process  is  thatan  arbitrary  sample  from  the  Markov  chain  can  be  obtainedwithout computing each step in the sequence. Letαt= 1−βtand ̄αt=Qti=1αi,  we  can  produce  a  samplext∼q(xt|x0)at an timesteptby the formulation.xt=√ ̄αtx0+√1− ̄αtε,(2)whereε∼ N(0,I).  Thus  the  forward  diffusion  process  canbe rewritten/simplified in terms ofαasq(xt|x0) =N(xt;√ ̄αtx0,(1− ̄αt)I).(3)2) Reverse Diffusion Process:The reverse process is also aMarkov  chain.  In  this  case,  a  neural  network  parameterizedbyθpredicts  the  reverse  diffusion  process  at  each  timestepdescribed aspθ(x0:T) =p(xT)TYt=1pθ(xt−1|xt),(4)wherepθ(xt−1|xt) =N(xt−1;μθ(xt,t),Σθ(xt,t)).(5)
4IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2025source  tumor  masksMS∈R3×H×W×Dand  the  futuretumor  growth  maskMf∈R1×H×W×D.  In  addition,  theassociated sequence of paired treatment and day variables, thatis,⟨T,D⟩S∪f={⟨τs1,ds1⟩,⟨τs2,ds2⟩,⟨τs3,ds3⟩,⟨τf,df⟩}.The objective is to maximize the posteriors,pMf|XS,pXf|XS,  andpMS|XS,  i.e.,  to  predict  future  tu-mor   masks,   generate   the   future   MRIs,   and   segment   thesource  tumor  masks,  given  the  conditional  MRIsXSwitha  sequence  of  paired  treatments  and  days⟨T,D⟩S∪f.  Thethree   posteriors   can   be   combined   to   form   a   joint   prob-abilitypMS∪f,Xf|XS,⟨T,D⟩S∪f.   Due   to   the   com-putational  complexity  of  the  problem,  the  model  trainingand  inference  steps  are  performed  using  2D  slices  sampledalong  the  dimensionsDofXandM,  instead  of  usingthe  3D  imaging  volumes,  i.e.,  to  maximize  the  posteriorpmS∪f,xf|xS,⟨T,D⟩S∪f, wheremS∪f∈R4×H×W∼MS∪f,xS∈R3C×H×W∼XS, andxf∈RC×H×W∼Xf.B. Treatment-aware Diffusion NetworkWe used a backbone neural network similar to the classicalUNet-based  diffusion  models  introduced  by  Ho  et  al.  [30].The  timesteps  of  the  diffusion  process  are  encoded  into  theneural network using sinusoidal embedding [31] and a single-layer  multilayer  perceptron  (MLP).  Following  the  timestepsembedding idea, we utilize two separate embedding and MLPlayers  for  injecting  the  paired  treatment  and  day  information(i.e.,⟨τs1,ds1⟩,⟨τs2,ds2⟩,⟨τs3,ds3⟩,and,⟨τf,df⟩)  into  ournetwork.  Specifically,  the  four  pairs  of  treatment  and  dayare  sequentially  fed  into  the  two  embedding  MLP  layersand  then  we  sum  the  learned  treatment  embedding  with  itsday  embedding  to  get  a  unique  feature  vector  for  each  pairof  treatment-day  variables.  This  way  we  get  four  treatmentvectors:  three  representing  source/past  treatment  information(indicated  bys1,s2ands3)  and  one  (f)  representing  thetarget/future treatment information as illustrated in Figure 2.Algorithm 1:TaDiff Training1repeat// Sample conditional and future MRI data.Note that we let|S∪f|= 4in this work.2(xS∪f,mS∪f,⟨T,D⟩S∪f)∼p(X,M,⟨T,D⟩)3t∼Uniform(1,...,T)4ε∼N(0;I)// Eq. 2, adding noise into target images5xt=√ ̄αtxf+√1− ̄αtε6( ̃ε, ̃m) =μθxS∪xt,⟨T,D⟩S∪f,t// Eq. 14, compute the segmentation loss onboth source and future tumors7 ̃mS, ̃mf=partition( ̃m)8ℓseg=ℓdice( ̃mS,mS) +√ ̄αtℓdice( ̃mf,mf)// Computerωbased on Eq. 159Take the joint gradient step according to∇θ∥ω(ε− ̃ε)∥2+λℓseg10untilconvergedAlgorithm 2:TaDiff Sampling/inferenceInput:Source images:xS, source and target (future)treatment-day⟨T,D⟩S∪fOutput:Future MRI:xfand tumor masks:mS∪f//T= 600andTm= 10as default1Initialize diffusion stepsTand mask fusion stepsTm2InitializexT∼N(0;I)∈R3×H×W3InitializemTm←0∈R4×H×W// Computer tumor mask fusion factor.4γ=PTmt=1 ̄αt5fort←T,...,1do6z∼N(0;I)ift >1elsez= 07( ̃ε, ̃m) =μθxS∪xt,⟨T,D⟩S∪f,t// Eq. 12 denoising.8xt−1=1√αtxt−1−αt√1− ̄αt ̃ε+q ̃βtz// Fuse the lastTmpredicted masks9mt−1=mt+ ̄αtγ ̃mift≤Tm10end11returnxf←x0,mS∪f←m0Based on experimental observations, we noticed that usingthe  relative  (difference)  distance  between  source  and  targettreatment times could help to speed up and stabilize training.As  a  result,  we  subtracted  the  source  vectors  from  the  targetvectors  to  get  their  diff-vectors,  which  we  then  concatenatewith the summation vector of the target treatment feature andtimestep  embeddings.  We  finally  used  the  new  concatenatedembedding  instead  of  the  original  timestep  embedding  tofeedforward  through  the  U-Net  except  for  the  middle-blockpart as shown in Figure 2. In the middle-block (also known asbottle-neck)  of  U-Net,  we  only  inject  the  summation  featurebetween the timestep and target treatment embeddings. Basedon  our  experimental  observation,  this  way  provides  us  asmooth  and  fast  learning  process  when  blending  the  target-treatment messages into the diffusion timesteps.In  the  input  to  the  model,  we  concatenated  the  sourcemulti-parametric MRI (i.e.,xs1,xs2,and,xs3) withxt. Notethatxtis  the  target  MRI  with  diffusion  noise  according  toEq.  2.  There  are  two  outputs  of  the  model.  The  first  is  thediffusion  estimated  diffusion  noise  at  the  time  stept.  Thiscan  be  used  to  generate  images  using  Eq.  12.  The  secondoutput  is  the  prediction  of  the  tumor  masks  from  both  thesource MRIs (xS) and the noised target MRI (xt). As a result,rather  than  being  a  pure  diffusion  model,  our  TaDiff  is  ahybrid  network  that  combines  both  denoising  diffusion  andsegmentation  tasks,  allowing  us  to  generate  future  MRI  andsegment  longitudinal  tumor  growth  masks  simultaneously  inan end-to-end manner. We present the extension of the DDPMtraining and sampling processes in Algorithms 1 and 2 respec-tively. Note that, the diffusion and segmentation branches sharethe  encoder  component.  The  diffusion  process  requires  600steps to generate the target images, whereas the segmentationprocess  utilizes  only  the  final  10  steps.  These  final  stepsprovide  the  highest  quality  input,  from  which  we  generate10  masks.  These  masks  are  then  weighted  and  averaged  to
LIUet al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING5（Eq. 12)Treatment-aware InputsSource MRI-seq InputsembTumor masksFutureMR Imagesmiddle-blockskip-linkembFig. 2.TaDiff model end-to-end pipeline for multi-parametric MRI generation and tumor growth prediction with respect to any given treatmentinformation and target/future time point. In general, the model takes both conditioning source MRI sequences and treatment-aware embeddings asinput, outputs target/future MRIs, and predicts tumor masks for both source treatment-day points and the given target treat-day point at the sametime. Section III-B presents more details about the network architecture, and algorithms 1 and 2 show details for training and inference with theTaDiff model.produce the final segmentation mask. This method ensures thatthe  segmentation  masks  benefit  from  the  high-quality  inputsderived from the latter stages of the diffusion process.Like [32], applying our model with multiple stochastic sam-pling processes (in this work, we considered 5 samplings), onecan obtain pixel-wise uncertainty maps for both the predictedtumor  masks  and  the  synthesized  MRIs  by  computing  thestandard  deviation  of  our  model’s  predictions  on  the  sameconditioning inputs.C. Joint Loss FunctionBecause  the  model  predicts  a  series  of  tumor  masks  onboth  source  and  future  MRIs  in  addition  to  the  conventionaldiffusion  noise.  We  hence  employ  the  dice  loss  [33],  for  thesegmentation subtask, which is defined asℓdice( ̃m,m) = 1−2| ̃mm|| ̃m|+|m|.(13)where|·|denotes theL1norm. Due to the lack of informationinxtfor  hight,  predicting  a  good  mask  from  the  image  isunfeasible for the model. We therefore weigh the Dice loss ofthe future segmentation according to the weight ofx0inxt.The segmentation loss is then defined asℓseg=ℓdice( ̃mS,mS) +√ ̄αtℓdice( ̃mf,mf).(14)The first dice loss is used for segmentations ( ̃mS) of the sourceimages, while the second dice loss is scaled/weighted by thenoise level factor ̄αused for predicting the tumor masks ( ̃mf)of noised target images (xt).In addition, we propose a weighting mechanism that enablesthe  model  to  prioritize  and  extract  representations  from  theglioma  region  and  its  most  dynamic  and  heterogeneous  sur-rounding regions, preventing the model from directly copyingthe   representations   of   reference   source   input   images   andfacilitating future MRI construction task learning. To this end,the weighting function is designed asω=ˆme−ˆm∗fkl×kl+ 1.(15)whereˆm=Pi∈S∪fmS∪f(i,···),∗denotes a convolution opera-tion  andfkl×klis  a  convolution  filter  initialized  as0.1witha  predefined  kernel  size  (default  askl=  11).  The  weightsfor  the  dilated  tumor  growth  region  will  be  in  the  range[5.451,1.886], while for the other region, the weights will be1. The weight matrix element value reflects the level to whichthe corresponding spatial feature has changed over longitudinaltime points.Finally, the joint loss function for training the TaDiff modelis defined asℓTaDiff=∥ω(ε− ̃ε)∥2+λℓseg.(16)whereλcontrols the amount of segmentation loss during thejoint optimization training process. Guided by our experimentsand observation, we setλ= 0.01in this work.IV.  EXPERIMENTSA. Dataset and MetricLocal data:A  total  of  225  MRI  exams  [34]  were  usedfor this study. There were 23 patients with diffuse high-gradeglioma,  confirmed  by  histology,  and  these  patients  receivedtreatment  at  our  institution  [35].  Patients  received  standardtreatment,  including  surgery,  fractionated  radiotherapy  (ap-proximately four weeks after surgery) with concomitant and/oradjuvant chemotherapy (CRT) with temozolomide (TMZ) [36].There  were  between  3  and  19  (mean  10)  longitudinal  MRIscans  acquired,  consisting  of  multi-parametric  types  (usedin  this  study):  pre-contrast  T1-weighted,  post-contrast  T1-weighted  (T1c),  and  T2  fluid-attenuated  inversion  recovery(Flair).  Scans  were  skull-stripped,  registered  to  a  commonspace  defined  by  the  T1,  and  resampled  to  isotropic1mmresolution.  For  intensity  normalization,  we  utilized  z-scorenormalization  on  a  per-channel  basis  (channel  means  imagetype,  i.e.,  T1,  T1c,  Flair,  etc).  Ground  truth  segmentationsof edema and enhancing tumors were created by experiencedneuroradiologists. The dataset was manually divided into twoparts, a training/validation set, and a test set. The training setincluded 18 patients and 177 longitudinal scans, while the test
6IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2025set consisted of 5 representative patients from a wide range ofage groups (32-65) with a total of 48 longitudinal scans.External data:We collected data from 37 additional high-grade glioma patients (18 men, 19 women), totaling 132 MRIexams from the publicly available LUMIERE dataset [37], forfurther  evaluation.  All  patients  underwent  surgical  resectionand  temozolomide-based  chemo-radiation  at  Inselspital,  theUniversity  Hospital  of  Bern,  Switzerland.  The  mean  age  atthe time of the first resection was 58 years, ranging from 39to  72  years,  with  survival  times  ranging  from  224  to  1309days  (mean:  686  days).  However,  this  dataset  didn’t  provideexpertly or manually annotated tumor masks.Metric:To evaluate the accuracy of the tumor segmentationand  growth  predictions,  we  calculated  the  Dice  SimilarityCoefficient  (DSC)  and  Relative  Volume  Difference  (RVD)between the ground truth annotations and the estimated tumormaps with an optimized threshold. For evaluating the qualityof  the  generated  MRIs,  three  widely  used  evaluation  metricswere utilized, i.e., the structural similarity index (SSIM) [38],peak  signal-to-noise  ratio  (PSNR),  and  mean  squared  error(MSE) between the target and the synthesized multi-parametricMRI. While, on the external test dataset, we only evaluate ourmodel’s performance on future MRI generation, assessed usingthe SSIM, PSNR, and MSE.In  a  clinical  setting,  the  generation  of  high-quality  MRIimages   significantly  improves   the   accuracy  of   diagnosingand  monitoring  conditions  such  as  tumor  growth.  HigherSSIM  or  PSNR  values  indicate  greater  structural  similarityand  improved  image  clarity.  Similarly,  higher  DSC  scoresand  lower  RVD  values  reflect  more  accurate  tumor  maskpredictions, leading to enhanced tumor growth quantification.These  improvements  enable  precise  assessments  of  tumorboundaries,  size,  and  progression,  thereby  supporting  moreinformed clinical decisions.B. Implementation and Training DetailsThe proposed method was implemented with PyTorch [39].The model used a 2D U-Net-like structure that consists of anencoder and decoder with skip connections and 64, 128, 256,and  512  channels  for  each  stage.  For  the  diffusion  module,we  modified  the  network  designed  in  DDPM  [30]  into  ourproposed  treatment-aware  conditioning  model.  We  employedthe  Adam  optimizer  algorithm  with  an  initial  learning  rate2.5×10−4with a warm-up (1000steps) and a cosine decayscheduler to train the model for 5 million iterations. We useda batch size of32and a gradient accumulation step of2. Theimages were cropped to a patch size of192×192. The trainingtook 350 GPU hours using a single Nvidia V100 32GB GPU.Note  that  during  the  training  phase,  our  model  is  trainedto  predict  three  scenarios:  future  (probability:  0.5),  middle(probability:  0.3),  and  past  (probability:  0.2)  MRI  exams.This  means  each  MRI  slice  can  serve  as  either  an  input  oran  output,  not  just  future  slices  as  outputs.  This  approachsignificantly  increases  the  number  of  training  combinations.For  example,  with  only  10  MRI  slices,  using  only  the  past3  to  predict  the  fourth  would  yield  just  7  training  examples.However, by allowing each MRI to be an output and selecting1,  2,  or  3  MRI  images  from  the  remaining  9  as  inputs(allowing  repetition),  we  achieve  a  total  of  8,190  possibletraining combinations. While time points and slices are likelydependent  on  one  another,  this  method  functions  similarlyto  data  augmentation,  effectively  maximizing  the  use  of  ourlimited  data.  Moreover,  the  diffusion  training  process,  whichadds random noise, enhances the robustness and effectivenessof the model by exposing it to varied scenarios during training.These strategies collectively improve the model’s reliability inpredicting  future  outcomes  despite  the  limited  dataset  size.During  the  subsequent  testing  and  inference,  we  utilize  themost recent 3 historical MRI data to predict the nearest futureframe.  If  fewer  historical  sequences  are  available,  the  mostrecent  MRI  is  duplicated  to  meet  the  requirement  of  threeinput sources.C. Test ResultsWe  tested  our  model  on  the  slices  containing  a  tumor  ofat  least1cm2at  each  target  session,  resulting  in  a  total  of3,352local test slices and a total of8,976external test slices.The  model  requires  the  three  most  recent  historical  MRIs  asinput. If fewer sequences are available, the most recent MRI isduplicated to meet this requirement. Using the most recent datapoints (e.g., t2, t3, t4) provides the best results for generatingsubsequent  images  (e.g.,  t5).  Although  the  model  can  utilizeearlier  data  points  (e.g.,  t1,  t2,  t3)  to  predict  images  at  latertime  points  (e.g.,  t5,  t6,  etc.),  the  accuracy  and  effectivenessof  these  predictions  tend  to  diminish  as  the  time  betweensessions  increases.  Specifically:  1)  DSC  drops  from0.85to0.46as  the  time  interval  extends  from0.5to24+months,2)  Uncertainty  increases  progressively,  as  reflected  by  thestandard deviation widening from0.09to0.32, 3) Predictionaccuracy  remains  most  reliable  within  a  4-month  window(Mean Dice0.75±0.12). Thus, our model can forecast tumorgrowth relatively accurately up to 4 months in advance, withdiminishing precision beyond this range due to accumulatinguncertainties.  Notably,  predictions  for  t5  or  beyond  can  stillachieve  reasonable  accuracy  when  using  t1,  t2,  and/or  t3  asinputs without t4, provided the treatment interval between t2/t3and t5 (or beyond) is less than 4 months.1) Local test results:In  the  following  two  tables,  we  sum-marized   the   results   of   our   model   on   three   tasks:   multi-parametric   MRI   generation,   future   tumor   prediction,   andsource  tumor  segmentation,  in  which↑/↓higher/lower  isbetter. Table I shows the test performance of each patient (i.e.,P-1, P-2, P-3, P-4, and P-5) across various ages (32−65yearsold) and survival time (11−83months). Table II summarizedthe  results  into  five  treatment-day  ranges,  i.e.,0−50(aboutthe  first  6  weeks  of  CRT  treatment),51−220(around  24weeks  of  TMZ  treatment  in  6  cycles),221−365(one-yearsurvival),366−720(two-year  survival),  and721+(overtwo-year  survival).  Overall,  we  observed  that  the  model  isable  to  account  for  stable  and  progressive  tumor  cases  withgrowth  and  shrinkage  in  different  locations.  Figure  3  showsthe qualitative comparisons of the predictions from our modeland the ground truth on the test set.For   multi-parametric   MRI   generation   tasks,   our   modeldemonstrated high performance with average SSIM:0.919±
14IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2025tumour  acidity  and  vasculature,”British  journal  of  cancer,  vol.  116,no. 6, pp. 785–792, 2017.[24]  J.  Sohl-Dickstein,  E.  Weiss,  N.  Maheswaranathan,  and  S.  Ganguli,“Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” inInternational conference on machine learning, pp. 2256–2265, PMLR,2015.[25]  Y.  Song  and  S.  Ermon,  “Generative  modeling  by  estimating  gradientsof  the  data  distribution,”Advances  in  neural  information  processingsystems, vol. 32, 2019.[26]  J.   Ho,   A.   Jain,   and   P.   Abbeel,   “Denoising   Diffusion   PobabilisticModels,”Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33,pp. 6840–6851, 2020.[27]  D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,”arXivpreprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.[28]  D.  J.  Rezende,  S.  Mohamed,  and  D.  Wierstra,  “Stochastic  backprop-agation   and   approximate   inference   in   deep   generative   models,”   inInternational conference on machine learning, pp. 1278–1286, PMLR,2014.[29]  O.  Ronneberger,  P.  Fischer,  and  T.  Brox,  “U-Net:  Convolutional  Net-works for Biomedical Image Segmentation,” inMedical Image Comput-ing  and  Computer-Assisted  Intervention–MICCAI  2015:  18th  Interna-tional Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings,Part III 18, pp. 234–241, Springer, 2015.[30]  P.  Dhariwal  and  A.  Nichol,  “Diffusion  Models  Beat  GANs  on  ImageSynthesis,”Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34,pp. 8780–8794, 2021.[31]  A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,Ł.  Kaiser,  and  I.  Polosukhin,  “Attention  is  all  you  need,”Advances  inneural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.[32]  J.  Wolleb,  R.  Sandk ̈uhler,  F.  Bieder,  P.  Valmaggia,  and  P.  C.  Cattin,“Diffusion models for implicit image segmentation ensembles,” inInter-national Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, pp. 1336–1348, PMLR, 2022.[33]  F.  Milletari,  N.  Navab,  and  S.-A.  Ahmadi,  “V-net:  Fully  convolutionalneural  networks  for  volumetric  medical  image  segmentation,”  in2016Fourth  International  Conference  on  3D  Vision  (3DV),  pp.  565–571,IEEE, 2016.[34]  I. T. Hovden, E. Fuster-Garcia, C. Larsson, J. Vardal, M. M. Kleppestø,T. R. Meling, P. Brandal, I. R. Groote, and A. Bjørnerud, “Brain tumorMRI: Serial assessments in longitudinal oncological research (SAILOR)(v1),” 2023.[35]  C. Larsson, I. Groote, J. Vardal, M. Kleppestø, A. Odland, P. Brandal,P.  Due-Tønnessen,  S.  S.  Holme,  T.  R.  Hope,  T.  R.  Meling,et  al.,“Prediction of Survival and Progression in Glioblastoma Patients UsingTemporal  Perfusion  Changes  During  Radiochemotherapy,”MagneticResonance Imaging, vol. 68, pp. 106–112, 2020.[36]  E. Fuster-Garcia, I. Thokle Hovden, S. Fløgstad Svensson, C. Larsson,J.  Vardal,  A.  Bjørnerud,  and  K.  E.  Emblem,  “Quantification  of  TissueCompression Identifies High-Grade Glioma Patients with Reduced Sur-vival,”Cancers, vol. 14, no. 7, p. 1725, 2022.[37]  Y.  Suter,  U.  Knecht,  W.  Valenzuela,  M.  Notter,  E.  Hewer,  P.  Schucht,R. Wiest, and M. Reyes, “The LUMIERE dataset: Longitudinal Glioblas-toma MRI with expert RANO evaluation,”Scientific data, vol. 9, no. 1,p. 768, 2022.[38]  Z.  Wang,  A.  C.  Bovik,  H.  R.  Sheikh,  and  E.  P.  Simoncelli,  “ImageQuality Assessment: from Error Visibility to Structural Similarity,”IEEETransactions on Image Processing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004.[39]  A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin,A.  Desmaison,  L.  Antiga,  and  A.  Lerer,  “Automatic  differentiation  inpytorch,” inNIPS 2017 Workshop on Autodiff, 2017.[40]  I. Cohen, Y. Huang, J. Chen, J. Benesty, J. Benesty, J. Chen, Y. Huang,and  I.  Cohen,  “Pearson  correlation  coefficient,”Noise  reduction  inspeech processing, pp. 1–4, 2009.[41]  H.  Ohgaki  and  P.  Kleihues,  “The  definition  of  primary  and  secondaryglioblastoma,”Clinical  cancer  research,  vol.  19,  no.  4,  pp.  764–772,2013.[42]  A.  Kendall  and  Y.  Gal,  “What  uncertainties  do  we  need  in  bayesiandeep  learning  for  computer  vision?,”Advances  in  neural  informationprocessing systems, vol. 30, 2017.[43]  Y.  Gal  and  Z.  Ghahramani,  “Dropout  as  a  bayesian  approximation:Representing  model  uncertainty  in  deep  learning,”  ininternationalconference on machine learning, pp. 1050–1059, PMLR, 2016.[44]  J. M. Hern ́andez-Lobato and R. Adams, “Probabilistic backpropagationfor  scalable  learning  of  bayesian  neural  networks,”  inInternationalconference on machine learning, pp. 1861–1869, PMLR, 2015.[45]  C.  Lu,  Y.  Zhou,  F.  Bao,  J.  Chen,  C.  Li,  and  J.  Zhu,  “DPM-solver:  Afast ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10steps,”Advances  in  Neural  Information  Processing  Systems,  vol.  35,pp. 5775–5787, 2022.[46]  A. Gholami, A. Mang, and G. Biros, “An inverse problem formulationfor  parameter  estimation  of  a  reaction–diffusion  model  of  low  gradegliomas,”Journal of mathematical biology, vol. 72, pp. 409–433, 2016.[47]  Q.  Chen,  Q.  Ye,  W.  Zhang,  H.  Li,  and  X.  Zheng,  “TGM-Nets:  Adeep  learning  framework  for  enhanced  forecasting  of  tumor  growthby  integrating  imaging  and  modeling,”Engineering  Applications  ofArtificial Intelligence, vol. 126, p. 106867, 2023.[48]  J.   Weidner,   I.   Ezhov,   M.   Balcerak,   M.-C.   Metz,   S.   Litvinov,S.  Kaltenbach,  L.  Feiner,  L.  Lux,  F.  Kofler,  J.  Lipkova,et  al.,  “Alearnable prior improves inverse tumor growth modeling,”arXiv preprintarXiv:2403.04500, 2024.